Rick Sowash’s compositions for clarinet

Simply by asking, any clarinetist can receive free PDFs of the full score-and-parts for any or all of my clarinet works as well as mp3 recordings.   

Please email me at:  rick@sowash.com.

It’s my policy to give away my music to anyone who is interested in discovering it.  Also, no permission is required to print the PDFs or perform the music.  

Nothing on this list of works is for sale.  My music is my gift to musicians and their audiences.   The ideas came to me for free; I am very happy to pass along my music for free.

Ask for a bunch of pieces!  You’re not being greedy.  You’re being curious!  That’s a good thing!

My scores and parts are professional in appearance, carefully rendered in the computer notation program Finale.  Page-turns are calculated for ease and convenience.  

All scores are for B flat Clarinet unless otherwise indicated.

Thank you in advance for allowing me to share my work with you.


FOR SOLO CLARINET:

Six Lovely Little Variations on “Love is Little”(2008)
	Easy piece in C major, for good beginners.  “Love is Little” is a Shaker hymn. 
	Duration:  4:08

Variations on a theme by Grandma Moses (2012)
	Easy piece in C major, for good beginners. The theme is mine, not really by G’ma Moses.
	Duration:  5:06

College Town Diary:  Twelve Months in Gambier;  twelve movements (1993)   	
	Each movement depicts a month in a year in an Ohio college town.  Miniatures, very short, alternately sarcastic and tender, sassy and poignant.  Fun for college students.
	Duration:  22:13

Variations Plain & Simple for solo B flat clarinet (2020)
	Easy piece in C major, for good beginners. The theme is original, tender, very American-sounding, like a folk hymn or a love theme from a Western.
	Duration:  5:50

Prelude (2021)
	Very short, easy, in C major.  A miniature.
	Duration: 2:00


FOR CLARINET QUARTET:  (three B flat clarinets + bass clarinet)

Our Home for clarinet quartet (three B flat clarinets + bass clarinet) seven mov'ts (1978, rev. 2012)
	Light and whimsical, musical descriptions of seven rooms in the composer’s home.  Easy.
	Duration:  12:30

Chanty & Ragtime for clarinet quartet, two movements.  1976, arr. 2016.
	An original sea chanty and ragtime, originally written for woodwind quintet.
	Duration:  6:45

The Mingling of Yonder and Near for clarinet quartet.  
	The piece mingles the mysterious music of yonder with the familiar music of the nearby, i.e., two very different musics are presented at the beginning which are then juxtaposed throughout the piece.  The “yonder” music is arpeggiated chords that are harmonically distant from one another while the “near” music almost sounds familiar, like something from the score of a French film. 	
	Duration:  5:38


FOR CLARINET AND PIANO:

Suite from “A College Town Diary” for clarinet & piano.  (2015, revised from earlier works.) 
	Six short movements, alternately tender and comical.
	Duration:  13 minutes.

Sanctuary at 3 AM for clarinet & piano (2000)  Comforting, quiet, soothing music.
	Duration:  6:30

Lullabye for Kara: for bass clarinet & piano (2002)  
	Gentle, quiet, bluesy, sleepy, a little Gershwin-esque, evokes “The Old South.”  
	Duration:  7:20  		

Two Homages for clarinet & piano (2007)
	I. Gelato per Dio (Ice Cream for God) - Homage to Puccini
	II.  Curly Prays - Homage to Richard Rodgers
	Duration:  8 min.

Concerto for Bb Clarinet & Orchestra  three movements (2007)
	Reduction for clarinet and piano.
	Duration:  30:17

The View from Carew:  Romance for clarinet & orchestra (2000) - reduction for clar. & piano
	This piece can stand alone but it is also the second movement of my clarinet concerto.
	Duration:  10:51

A Hero’s Prayer for bass clarinet and piano.  (2000).  Thoughtful, brooding, quietly heroic.
	Duration:  5:23

Lincolnesque for Bb clarinet and piano.  (1999).  
	Evoking the man of the Prairie, the folksy, lanky, gentle lover of books and teller of stories.  Quiet and a tad wistful.  
	Duration:  2:22

Foreground Background for clarinet and piano.  (2000).
	A folksy tune given an ‘up close’ treatment first and then transformed into something grand and distant.
	Duration:  4:38.  

Like a Twig Upon the Shoulders of a Mighty Stream:  Part One for clarinet & piano.  (2011, rev. 2022).
	Reduction of a portion of 3rd movement of “North Country Suite” for orchestra, which is an homage to the Mississippi River.  The music sounds American, a little like a Hollywood western film score, with a touch of the Blues.
	Duration:  3:20.

Like a Twig Upon the Shoulders of a Mighty Stream:  Part Two for clarinet & piano.  2011, rev. 2022.   arr. by Ona Pinsonneault.
	alternate title:  Beignets & Gelato.   Music in “Dixieland” style.   Duration:  2:15.

The Alphabet of Streams for clarinet & piano.  1995, transcribed 2022.  A hybrid of Bach-like gestures and a fragment of the Blue scale.  Duration:  2:15.

Rondo Pastorale: Homage to Gerald Finzi for B flat clarinet & piano.  2022.   In a cheery, bucolic style.  The piano part is densely contrapuntal and reminiscent of Bach, whom Finzi greatly admired.  Yet the music still sounds American somehow.   Duration 6:33

Footnote for B flat clarinet & piano. 2023.  A modest little piece, easy to play, but sweet.
	Duration:  2:15.

Peace Descends like Snow for B flat clarinet & piano.  2023.  A quiet piece somewhat in the manner of Vaughan Williams but still American-sounding.  Both parts are fairly easy to play.
	Duration:  3:13.

Beyond the Reach of Words for Bb clarinet & piano.  2023.  A pensive piece.  Written for a friend to play in church as “centering music.”
	Duration:  4:18.

Sonata for Clarinet & Piano.   2024.  Five movements.  Key of D minor.
		I.  Wintry Dawn  6:44   serious, beautiful
		II.  Scherzo  3:08    light-hearted
		III.  Largo  2:46    gorgeous
		IV.  Fugue  2:02	sprightly, very neo-classical
		V.  Rondo Finale  4:22   rambunctious
	Duration:  19:00

Full Circle Suite, 2024  Eight movements.    Duration:  18:00
1.  The Owl and the Pussycat   in F major  2:55
	1971, rev. 2024
2.  Twilight Turns Darker Blue   in B flat major  2:22
	1975, 2024
3.  The Passing of Buffalo Bill   in E flat major  1:27
	1968, rev. 2024
4.  Waking at Night  in A flat major  1:26
	1977, rev. 2024
5.  High-Bouncing Lover  in C major  :47
	1971, rev. 2024
6.  The Fat Cat on the Mat  in C major  3:21
	1969, rev. 2024
7.  Sleep, Child, Lie Quiet   in C minor  2:00
	1974, rev. 2024
8.  Light is Her Step   in G major, then A flat major   3:08
	1975, rev. 2024
	The title refers to the expression “coming full circle.”  These are eight pieces which were originally songs I wrote when I was in my twenties, now fifty years ago.  Revisiting, revising and rescoring these songs was like collaborating with my younger self. 


FOR CLARINET & CELLO

Born of the Same Wild Mother: A Wintry Suite for clarinet & cello (1993, rev. 2001)
	Five movements.  The music is a little dark, chilly, bracing, but also sometimes tender.
	Duration:  12:11

Three Bagatelles for clarinet & cello; three movements  (also available for violin & cello) (2005)  
	Short, humorous movements.  A tribute to Laurel & Hardy.  Easy and fun to play. 
	Duration:  4:30  

Glory Hallelujah for clarinet & cello;  four movements (2013)
	Movements I, II and IV are a little jazzy; III is marked “Religioso.”  Last movement quotes 	“Glory, glory, halleujah” from “The Battle Hymn of the Republic.”  
	Duration:  11:20 

Calloway Suite for clarinet and cello, revised from earlier works in 2014.
	A cycle of seven short, humorous pieces in tribute to Cab Calloway.
	Duration 16 minutes.

A Christmas Ceremony for clarinet and cello; five movements.  2011.
	For use at weddings and worship services, but also suitable for recitals.  The piece can be played any time of year;  if not during the Holidays, just drop the word “Christmas.”
	I. Prelude, 
	II. Processional 
	III. The Ceremony 
	IV. Recessional 
	V. Postlude
	Duration:  13:27

Condolence for clarinet and cello; 2023.  Serious, yet sweetly sad, appropriate for a memorial service.  
	Duration:  4:31


DUOS FOR CLARINET & BASSOON

Three Bagatelles for clarinet & bassoon; three movements  (2005)  
	Short, humorous movements.  A tribute to Laurel & Hardy.  Easy and fun to play. 
	Duration:  4:30  

“Darkening November, Brightening April” for B flat clarinet & bassoon. (2023)
	Two movements evoking the borderlines between seasons.
	Tonal, lyrical, moderately demanding, requiring strong intermediate-level players.
	Duration:  12:00


TRIOS FOR VIOLIN, CLARINET AND PIANO:

Trio #1 for violin,  A clarinet & piano: “Sunny Days”;  four movements (1994)  
	Blends Belo-Russia folk-songs with original tunes that have a distinctly American sound.  
	Duration:  17:55

Trio #2 for violin, A clarinet & piano:  “American Variations on a Belo-Russian Folktune”;  
	One long, rich and varied movement (1994, rev. 1996, rev. 2005)  
	A little Russian folktune gradually becomes more and more American-sounding.  
	Duration:  15:19

Trio #3 for violin, clarinet & piano: “Memories of Corsica”; three movements (2007)
	I. Arid Heat, II. Aromatic Breezes and III. Ardent Souls. 
	Duration:  15:20

Trio #4 for violin, Bb clarinet & piano: “Images of Mt. Emily”; five movements (2011)
	Images of a mountain in eastern Oregon.  
	I. Good Morning, Miss Emily,  II. Reflections,  III. Here Comes Spring,  
	IV. Silent Sentinel,  V. Harvest Time: Prayer & Hymn
	Duration:   22 min. 

Breezes at Mazatlán for violin, clarinet in B flat & piano.  2023.
	I.  Morning Breeze at Mazatlan.   Duration:  1:35.
	II.  Evening Breeze at Mazatlan.    Duration:  1:36.
 Very short, lyrical pieces written to be a brief offertory in a church service in Mazatlan, Mexico.
	
Fugue in F Danke Herr Bach for violin, clarinet in B flat & piano.  2023.
	Very Bach-ish fugue written to be a brief offertory.
	Duration:  1:40

TRIOS FOR CLARINET, CELLO AND PIANO:

Trio #1 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Voyage of the Spirit”; four movements (1998)
	Moves from mysterious through romantic to exuberant.  
	Duration:  17:44

Trio #2 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Enchantment of April”; three movements (2002)
	Lush, romantic, springtime music.  Slow movement is the most beautiful I’ve written.
	Duration:  20:09

Trio #3 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Shadows of November”; three movements (2002) 
	Outer movements are darkly energetic, middle movement is tender and sad.  
	Duration:  15:24

Trio #4 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Conversation of the Trees”; five movements (2002)
	All three instruments are made from wood, after all.  Here, their respective trees converse.
	Duration:  26:18	

Trio #5 for clarinet, cello & piano: “in classical style”; four movements (2002)
	A tongue-in-cheek homage to the great classical composers, especially Beethoven and 		Schubert.  I. Sonata-allegro form, II. Theme & variations, III. Minuet, IV. Rondo finale
	Duration:  26:30

Trio #6 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Goddess of the Moon”; five movements (2002)
	A night-time piece, ambiguous, impressionistic, nocturnal, very beautiful but a little strange.
	I. Prologue, II. Nocturne, III. Interlude, IV. Scherzo, V. Epilogue
	Duration:  27:12
Note:  This music is gorgeous, but the whole piece is a little long for practical use in concerts.  An alternative is to perform only movements I, III and V with the title “Three Nocturnes for clarinet, cello and piano.”  Another alternative is to perform only movements II and IV with the title “Nocturne and Scherzo for clarinet, cello and piano.  Both alternatives have worked very well.

Trio #7 for A clarinet, cello & piano: “The Philosopher visits a Country Fair”(2003)
	Snappy, short, funny, a little like Bernstein’s Candide Overture. 
	Duration:  5:25

Trio #8 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Two Self-Portraits”; two movements (2003)
	I. Self-Portrait as a fool, II. Self-Portrait as a sage.” 
	Duration:  12:56  

Trio #9 for clarinet, cello & piano:  “Five Women”; five movements (2003)
	Portraits of five women I love.  Niece, aunt, friends and wife.
	Duration:  18:09

Trio #10 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Winds of May”;  four movements (2003)
	Windy, fresh, intimate music.  The easiest of my clarinet/cello/piano trios.
	I.  Morning, II. Deep Forest, III. Wildflowers, IV. Sunset 
	Duration:  12:25
 
Trio #11 for clarinet, cello & piano: “We Sang, We Danced”;  four movements (2003)
	Good times remembered nostalgically.  Fairly easy and fun.  The last movement is a tango.
	Duration:  16:23

Trio #12 for clarinet, cello & piano: “Voyageurs”;  four movements (2003)
	Powerful and compelling, an epic homage to and evocation of Canada.
	I. Geese in Flight, II. Song of the Voyageurs, III. Starshadows on Snow, 
	IV. A Majestic Land
	Duration:  28 min.

Trio #13 for clarinet, cello & piano:  “Passacaglia & Fugue”;  two movements (2004)
	An anti-war piece, sad and furious, dedicated “To the victims of George W. Bush and 		Osama bin Ladin.”  My opinion: this is one of my best, strongest, most deeply felt pieces.
	Duration:  16:40

The View from Carew:  Romance for clarinet, cello & piano (2000)
	Neo-romantic, sad and beautiful.  Also available for clarinet & piano. 
	Also available for clarinet and orchestra.  See below. 
	Duration:  10 min.

Reduction for clarinet, cello & piano of my Concerto for cello & strings with A clarinet.  
	four movements (2006)
	I. Hymns & Fugues, II. Bulgarian Blues, III. Sorbet, IV. Finale. 
	Duration:  22:40

FOR VIOLIN, CLARINET, CELLO AND PIANO:

Daweswood for violin, clarinet, cello & piano;  three movements (1980)  
	I. The Bud, II. The Blossom, III. The Berry.
	Cheerful, serene meditations on the lifecycle of plants. 
	Duration:  15:38

Anecdotes and Reflections: A Portrait of America for violin, Bb clarinet, cello & piano;  
	six movements (1989)
	A long, eclectic work, attempting to express the staggering diversity of American culture.  Movements I and II, III and IV, V and VI can be played as separate, stand-alone, two-movement works.  In other words, all six movements don’t have to be played in the same concert.
	Duration:  38:39

Icons:  Gershwin & Sousa for violin, Bb clarinet, cello & piano;  two movements. (1989)
	Homages, first tender, then zesty, to two great American composers, these are movements II and VI from Anecdotes and Reflections, often performed together.
	Duration:  12:40

A Perfect Day for Sailing for violin, Bb clarinet, cello & piano (1989)
	Exciting, breezy, outdoors-y music, like sailing.  This is movement III from Anecdotes and 		Reflections
	Duration:  5:33

Three Pieces for violin, Bb clarinet, cello & piano (1989)
	I. Immigrants, II. Portrait of a River, III. Opposites Reconciled
  	These are movements I, IV and V from Anecdotes and Reflections.
	Duration:  22:30

FOR REED TRIO (OBOE, B flat CLARINET AND BASSOON):

Impressionist Suite #1 for oboe, B flat clarinet and bassoon; three movements (2000)
	Canonic homages to Renoir, Monet and Manet.
	Duration:  12:13

Impressionist Suite #2 for oboe, B flat clarinet and bassoon; three movements (2000)
	Canonic homages to Caillebotte, Cassat, Sisley and Bazille.
	Duration:  13 min.

FOR CLARINET TRIO (TWO B flat CLARINETS + BASS CLARINET):

Impressionist Suite #1; three movements (2000)
	Canonic homages to Renoir, Monet and Manet.
	Duration:  12:13

FOR NON-STANDARD ENSEMBLES:

Trio #1 “con Brio” for violin, clarinet & cello; five movements (1999)
	Written to suit the musical tastes of a fiery Italian clarinetist friend.
	Duration:  17:53

Trio #2 for violin, clarinet in A & cello “The Journey Does Not End”; one movement.  2023
	Three sections played without pause:  slow - fast - slow.  Moods are wistful, joyful, serene.
	Duration:  9:50

Serenade for Mary: A Musical Get-well Card for flute, clarinet & string quartet; five mov'ts (1978)  
	Light, lovely music.  "Mary" is not the Virgin, but rather a woman the composer admires. 
	I. Overture toward Mary, II. Lullabye for Mary, III. Scherzo on Mary, IV. Spiritus Maria  		(invoking the other, better-known Mary), V. Theme and ‘Mary-ations’
	Duration:  21:05
 
A Little Breakfast Music for two violins, oboe and clarinet;  five movements (1976)  
	Serious but also humorous, like Haydn’s music often is.  
	I. Orange Juice, II. French Toast, III. Bacon & Eggs, 
	IV. Honey on English Muffins, V. A Variety of Herb Teas.  
	Duration:  26:14

Our Home for Woodwind Quartet: flute, oboe, clarinet and bassoon  seven movements (1978) 
 	Light and whimsical, musical descriptions of seven rooms in the composer’s home.	 Easy.
	Duration:  12:30

Lagoons of San Diego County for flute, alto flute, Bb clarinet & piano; three movements.  2014. 
	1. Rising Tide, 2. Nocturne, 3. Breeding Frenzy
	Duration: 15 min.

Be of Good Cheer for Bflat Clarinet, French horn and cello.  2023.
	Cheerful music with an emphasis on counterpoint as all three instruments are of equal importance.
	Duration:  4:45

Escapades for Clarinet, French horn & piano.  2023.
	Exuberant ‘adventure music.’  
	Duration:  9:40.

Exits & Entrances for clarinet, Fr. Horn, cello & piano.  2023
	Two movements:  I. Exit of the Introverts, II. Entrance of the Extroverts.
	Duration 7 min.

Symphony for Seven Instruments for fl., ob., trp. vln., vla., VC & pno.  2023
	Four movements, each of which can be played as a ‘stand-alone’ piece.
		I.  Imbued with the Truth  8:23
		II.  Fugue of Gratitude  4:12
		III.  Credo (This I Believe)  6:21
		IV.  Fughetta  3:27
			Total duration:  21:22


FOR CLARINET AND VOICE

Along the River for mezzo soprano, clarinet & piano;  texts by James Joyce.  1998, rev. 2006.
	Wistful, passionate, the cycle tells a love story; a personal favorite of mine.
	Duration:  21 min.

Along the River for mezzo soprano, flute, clarinet & piano;  texts by James Joyce.  1998, rev. 2007.
 	Revised to include flute.  Wistful, passionate, the cycle tells a love story; this piece is a 		personal favorite of mine.
	Duration:  21 min.

Three Musical Myths for coloratura soprano, A clarinet and piano.   1995.
	Powerful settings of well-known, ancient Greek mythic tales about the power of music.  
 	I. Pan, II. Music of the Spheres, III. Orpheus.   
	Duration:  8:10

Song of the Marsh for mezzo, flute, clarinet, violin, cello & pno.; text by Odell Shepard.  2010.
	A beautiful but desolate marsh finds its voice and sings a stern warning to humans.
	Duration:  7:24

Three Whitman Songs for mezzo soprano & clarinet;  texts by Walt Whitman  (1998) 
	(Also available in a version for baritone and clarinet.)	
	I. The First Dandelion   II. A Noiseless Patient Spider   III. A Farm Picture
	Duration:  6:12


CLARINET QUINTET:

Quintet for A clarinet & strings; four movements (1995)  (also available for B flat clarinet) 
	Written for the French clarinetist Lucien Aubert, who premiered it in Paris in June of 1996.  	An American’s response to the great architectural structures of European classical music.
	Duration:  24:51 min. 

WOODWIND QUINTET:

Woodwind Quintet:  Three American Perennials for woodwind quintet (1974)
 	The movements are respectively ironical, expansive, and humorous. 
	I. Folk Dance, II. Sea Chanty, III. Ragtime
	Duration:  12:28

Hope is Kindled for woodwind quintet  (2023)
	Quietly optimistic.
	Duration:  5:25

The Piper at the Gates of Dawn for woodwind quintet  (2023)
	Mysterious flute solo opens the piece, the others gradually entering.  The middle section is a “Hymn to the Sun.”  The mysterious music returns.
	Duration:  7:00

Hymn of Hope for woodwind quintet  (2023)
	Inspired by Vaughan Williams’ Prelude to “The 49th Parallel,” this piece begins with a searching introduction, then an original hymn, a return to the intro music, a repeat of the hymn in a new key, and a coda.  The effect is joyous, tragic and uplifting, all at the same time.
	Duration:  4:00


WIND OCTET:

“Audubon” for wind octet (2 oboes, 2 clarinets, 2 Fr.horns, 2 bassoons); one movement (2006)  
	Musical portrait of the ideals and achievements of John James Audubon.
	Duration:  11:20

FOR CLARINET AND ORCHESTRA:

The View from Carew:  Romance for clarinet & orchestra (2000)
	This piece can stand alone but it is also the second movements of my clarinet concerto.
	Duration:  10:51

Concerto for Bb Clarinet & Orchestra.  three movements (2007) 
	Duration:  30:17

Concerto for Cello & Strings with A clarinet.  four movements (2006)
	Written for Bulgarian cellist Kalin Ivanov who premiered it in Carnegie Hall.
	I. Hymns & Fugues, II. Bulgarian Blues, III. Sorbet, IV. Finale. 
	Duration:  22:40




Here is an article about my clarinet-cello-piano trios.

A Clarinetist’s Journey of the Spirit   by Joe Rosen

(printed in The Clarinet magazine, September 2007)

	“What music is this?  Chamber music with clarinet, sure, but by whom?” 

	Radio reception in the Pennsylvania mountains fades, recovers, then fades again, exasperating drivers.  Fear of missing the announcer’s tag forced me to pull over and wait for the coda.  Finally came the revelation:  Rick Sowash.  New to me.  I made note and hightailed it home to New York City.

	A Google later I learned that I had heard one of no less than fifteen trios for clarinet, cello and piano by this 57-year old Cincinnati composer.   Among my best friends are a cellist and pianist.  I thought, why not? and ordered the sheet music directly from the composer at his website.

	My cellist and pianist friends joined me twice a week, for seven weeks and played through all the trios in the order in which they were written, an extraordinary journey.  Then we played them through all over again, thrilled to find memorable tunes, rich tonal harmonies, intricate counterpoint and an astonishing variety of moods, ranging from humor to tragedy.
	
	These trios were written during the past eight years for the composer’s French friends, “les Gavottes,” a Riviera-based professional trio.  They recorded the first three on their CD “Enchantement d’avril” and have performed a half dozen of the trios, most notably at the Cannes Film Festival.  Les Gavottes have not found time to perform or even read all the music Sowash has written for them; my friends and I are the first musicians to play through all of Sowash’s trios.

	The first trio is entitled “Journey of the Spirit,” a title which might apply collectively to  these fifteen works.  Its four movements proceed from a darkly mysterious opening in A minor, through a Romantic interlude in G major, to a probing plainchant in E major, to a Hallelujah-like finale in Eb major.  It’s a journey from doubt to faith.

	Trio #2, Enchantment of April, gives a nod to the life-affirming Miramax film of a few years back entitled “Enchanted April.”  We’re in Bb and Eb major and it’s all sweetness and light.

	The zig-zag pattern of these trios is apparent in the contrasting Trio #3, Shadows of November in A minor.  The outer movements invite rough, energetic playing while the middle movement, a farewell to Autumn, is some of the saddest music we’ve ever played.

	There are some challenging licks in these trios, but virtuoso display is not what this music is about.  Solid intermediate players can easily handle most of the trios.  Expressivity is what’s required.

	Conversation of the Trees is the subtitle for #4, in D minor, offering five movements of lively ‘chatter’ between the three instruments, which are made of wood, after all, and wood comes from trees, right?  Here the trees “speak.”

	Trio #5, “in classical style,” takes up the vocabulary of Haydn-through-Schubert, but with an American twist.  The key is G minor, the minuet is tongue-in-cheek, the variations on an original American-sounding hymn-tune are colorful and funny and touching.  All of the major themes of the first three movements recur in the rollicking Finale.

	Again by sharp contrast comes the lengthy Trio #6, Goddess of the Moon, with a Debussy-like atmosphere, impressionistic and ambiguous, and cast in the gorgeous key of Db major.  The movements are entitled:  Prologue, Nocturne, Interlude, Scherzo and Epilogue.  We performed this trio in concert and found that audiences want to applaud after the rousing Scherzo, thinking the piece has ended.

	It’s a zig-zag again from lush, long #6 to short, snappy, funny #7 “The Philosopher Visits a Country Fair” in one movement.  In A major, this one reminded us of Bernstein’s Candide Overture.  The country fair bubbles along in changing meters while the grumpy philosopher is depicted by a noble, pompous hymn-tune in 3/4.  The two musics are then combined and get along beautifully.

	Self-portraits are usual for painters, rare among composers.  Trio #8 offer Two Self-portraits, both in Eb minor.  First “as a fool,” a clunky, hilarious four-part round with a  contrasting pastoral section in C major.  Then the deeply felt, “as a sage” with a C major middle section once again, this time with a starry-night feel.

	From self-portrayal, the composer moved to portraying “Five Women” in Trio #9 in F major.  They are the women in the composer’s life and his movement titles describe the ladies thus:  Merry & Mystical, In the Process of Becoming, Mother of My Children, Beautiful & Sad, and The Vitality of Emilie.  This is the trio with the greatest variety of styles.

	The next two trios are lighter and easier.  “Winds of May” is #10 in Bb major, with movements entitled Morning, Deep Forest, Wildflowers and Sunset.  #11 in G major is a nostalgic remembrance of good times, entitled “We Sang, We Danced.”   The last movement is a very funny Tango, the only one in all the trios.

	The longest and most challenging trio is #12 in Eb major, “Voyageurs,” an epic homage to Canada.  The first movement, “Geese in Flight,” captures the V-formation flight pattern of Canada geese with a figure that rises in the clarinet while falling simultaneously in the cello.  “Song of the Voyageurs” evokes the hardiness of the French trappers with what sounds like a Breton folksong.  Canada’s natural wonders are depicted in the last two movements:  “Starshadows on Snow” and “A Majestic Land.”  This music has a Sibelius-like orchestral breadth and ambition.

	Thirteen is famously the unlucky number.  Trio #13 in Eb minor, though a joy to play, is alternately sad and furious.  The two movements, Passacaglia and Fugue, are played with hardly a pause between them, since the fugue subject grows right out of the Passacaglia tune.  Indeed, at the height of the fugue, the Passacaglia tune recurs in the bass while the couterpoint rages overhead.  This trio is boldly ‘dedicated to the victims of Bush and Bin Laden,’ a mournful, angry response to current events.

	There are two un-numbered trios, both chamber transcriptions of orchestral works.  “The View from Carew,” originally a rhapsody in Eb major for clarinet and orchestra, evokes the sublime view of the Ohio Valley that is to be seen atop Carew Tower, the tallest building in Cincinnati.  

	The other and most recent trio is a transcription of the composer’s new Concerto for Cello and Strings with Clarinet, written in the Fall of ‘06.  It’s a cello concerto alright, but the clarinet seems unwilling to accept this and constantly tries to upstage the soloist.  As in trio #7, the key is A major and the score calls for the A clarinet.  After the dark anger of #13 and the deep sighs of “Carew” the mood finally turns joyful again in this final trio.  The four movements are:  Hymns & Fugues, Bulgarian Blues, Sorbet (a 28-second bagatelle) and the improbable Finale, written in the Reggae/Dixieland style known as ‘Ska.’

	I’ll admit to being a little obsessed with this composer but the rewards of playing his music are very great.  Part of the fun, for me, was that, when I started playing his music, almost no one seemed to have heard of him.  That’s changing.  Kalin Ivanov premiered his cello concerto in Carnegie Hall in April, ‘07.  Rick met Kalin in my apartment while attending a home concert of his music which I had organized.

	In discovering these trios and the many other Sowash clarinet works (over fifty!) we’ve also made a friend.  Rick has attended and emceed performances we’ve done in Manhattan, Long Island, Cleveland, Cincinnati and Waterloo, Ontario.  He’s even written two works specifically for me:  Three Bagatelles for Clarinet & Bassoon and “Audubon,” his only wind octet.

	It’s been a Journey of the Spirit.  And it all started with a half-heard broadcast in the mountains of Pennsylvania.


	-- Joe Rosen is a passionate and very active amateur clarinetist based in New York City.  
	-- For information about Rick Sowash’s CDs and sheet music, go to:  www.sowash.com.

